if you want to lift to 100
it basically means you have to delay the
onset by about two decades of every
major chronic disease
because i had this biomarker i started
to kind of believe
that i might have cancer doctor wants to
put me on a statin medication an ldl and
blah blah blah
and i'm like okay that was the science
50 years ago
so it doesn't mean you can't get cancer
you better figure out a way to get them
20 years after the average person
the only reason we age is that our
repair systems become complacent
but in a world where we typically would
die from starvation or from war
we were at the middle of the food chain
you know give us another
5 million years of evolution we could
evolve
200-year lifespans that's what should
happen
i don't really care as much as what you
eat and how much i want you eating at
the same time every day whatever that is
it's not just what you eat it's when you
eat it's important
i'd be fasting three days a month seven
days every three months
14 days once a year there's no amount of
money
that would make it worth you know not
knowing the answer to that question
the instructions to be young are still
in the cell somewhere
so anyone who says we've reached our
maximum limit doesn't know what they're
talking about
i would rather be poor but know how to
you know live longer and have all the
money in the world and lose my health
so aging actually has been worked on for
about 5 000 years or more
and just in the last 20 years we've come
up with a set of
hallmarks of aging there are about eight
of them and i think many of your viewers
will know
that there's telomere attrition the ends
of chromosomes get shorter mitochondria
the power packs will run out of energy
as we get older
there's a list a long laundry list and
most of the people in
in my field have said okay we've we've
figured out aging we've got this list
we put in a nice pie chart and that's it
but what i'm saying is that
why does all that stuff happen it's not
enough just to tick off what happens you
have to understand
is there an upstream cause of all of
that and so in my book
and in scientific papers we are now
putting out for the scientific community
to read as well
what we think is going on is that our
bodies are
losing essential information as we get
older
that drives many if not all of those
hallmarks that we
know exist so what
in what way is the epigenome involved in
this how are we losing the information
give people a quick little diatribe
about the difference between genetics
which i think they get
and then the epigenome and epigenetics
and and how that plays out yeah
yeah for sure it's not that complicated
there's really just two main types of
information in our body
that we get from our parents the first
is genetic we all know about dna and the
four letters atcg
uh it's a long molecule in cell and it's
a string of letters
that's digital that's like the music
that's on on a dvd those things we used
to use uh to store movies
but there's another level of information
that's above that in
cells which is the reader of the
information
that's called the epigenome and that
really is
different because it's analog
information in the same way that
records and cassette tapes they sucked
they were terrible at storing
information but the problem is we have
an analog
version of information the epi genome
which controls which genes
in the string of dna are turned on and
off so dna
isn't just flailing around like a string
it's actually packaged up
around proteins we call histones and
it's it's like if you spool your hose in
the garden you loop it around and then
you can put those loops into bigger
structures then you get a chromosome
which you can see
any high school student can see under a
microscope that's that chromatin
structure as we call it
is the epigenome and so when when the
hose is looped tightly
and spooled up that's stopping genes
from being red so genes are off when
they're compacted
but also if the cell needs to read
certain genes and a nerve cell needs to
read the nerve cell genes and the liver
cell needs to read
specifically the liver cell genes and so
they open those ones up and now the cell
can get access and read those
that's an analog system because it it's
varying all the time it changes when you
wake up what you eat
so it is literally the amount that the
um
the dna is unspooled and the place in
which it is unspooled so that it can be
read
right and that's what determines the
cell's function and identity
which we you know when we're born where
26 billion cells
each one of those cells knows what it is
and what it has to be 80 years later
it and its descendants and over time
what i'm saying is aging is caused
because cells lose their packaging and
then eventually cells lose their
identity
disease ensure ensues cells check out
they
become zombie-like and they're now
senescence right senescence and then our
organs fail
and we die you know if you had grandkids
or great-grandkids and you couldn't play
with them
you couldn't tie your shoe i mean we
actually used tying a shoe as one of the
metrics to evaluate sort of flexibility
and certain physical performance so most
people our age
don't think of tying their shoe as a
physical performance
and yet when you would start to lose
those things i think you'd have a
radically different view of
you know what am i doing but how do you
get there and and
look perform and feel like the way we
imagine a 60 year old today
a fit six-year-old because i know some
six-year-olds that are just amazing
right
what we've discovered over the last 20
years is there are certain types of
enzymes
that help package the dna and help with
the dna repair these are the ones that
doing the ping pong game
and without those we're screwed we
basically will will age more rapidly
conversely what's really exciting is is
we've discovered that
you can make them more active to make
sure the dna
is packaged correctly and the repair is
very efficient
and there are ways you can do that
exercise
dieting being hungry they allow these
enzymes that control
our body and make us healthier they make
those enzymes much more active so
instead of a pacman doing this
you exercise your diet take them take a
molecule that we work on
and it'll go around and fix everything
much more efficiently and keep you
younger for longer we think
how do you make the body feel like it's
under threat adversity
so one is run a lot or at least become
out of breath
you know a few times a week your body
will say oh man we had we had to outpace
one of those saber-toothed cats again
gotta go to build up the body um the
other is to be hungry
either a couple of times a week or every
day you know skip a meal or two
and then your body will turn on these
sirtuins make more of that fuel
nad for the enzymes and we think that's
what's
in part responsible for the health
benefits of those uh lifestyle
choices the only reason we age is that
our repair systems
become complacent you mentioned that
what
what is beneficial for you when you're
young come backs to bite you when you're
old
what we think is that these repair
systems are very good when we're young
so the idea is it's called antagonistic
pleiotropy
and i think it's right and that is that
we evolved to stay
healthy and alive and fit till we're 40
and then
the forces of natural selection decline
after that because we've
essentially bred we've often had
children but we don't need to stick
around beyond that
and building a body that will last a
thousand years is pointless at that
you know so most species only live as
long as they need to to reproduce
and then a little bit more if you're a
mouse that could
die within two years they only build a
body that lasts two years if you're a
whale that has no predators you can live
for a couple of hundred years
that makes more sense the reason is that
we were not at the apex of the food
chain until recently
but in a world where we typically would
die from starvation or from war
a lot of men didn't make it to 40
because of that we were
at the middle of the food chain only now
we we actually
barely have a chance of dying before 70
or 80 unless we're unlucky
give us another 5 million years of
evolution
we could evolve 200 year life spans
that's what should happen
well there are different levels to
resetting aging there are
three levels that we know of the first
is pretty easy to reset
or to to manipulate these are the
proteins that turn
genes on and off very quickly we call
them transcription factors
and they they basically read a gene and
make a protein that's what they do
that's level one that's easy go a little
bit hungry
that'll change level two is a little bit
harder the level two is
not just changing which genes are
quickly turned on and off but actually
silencing genes for for a long time
and this is where my enzymes that we
work on the sirtuins come into play
let's go back to the pacman they clip
off acetyls
off these packing proteins you spool up
the hose
and it becomes becomes locked in that
gene gets silenced
for a long time so to do that you can
exercise you can diet but
you also i think you need a little bit
of help as well
what gets really interesting and this is
something most scientists don't even
know about yet
is level three the deep layer of aging
there's actually a dna clock that tells
our bodies
how old we are we i could take your
blood and read it
and i could tell you roughly when you're
gonna die what yeah we can do that what
are you looking for
we're looking for chemical groups that
get added and subtracted to our dna mole
the long string in the cell you get
chemical modifications in predictable
ways as you get older starting from
conception
so even in the womb even as a kid even
as a teenager you're aging based on this
clock that goes up linearly
and where you fit on that line it's very
accurate
that tells you your biological age but
how do you know when the person's gonna
die
is that just based on actual straight
lines is it actuarial tables though the
human average human lifespan is 86 and
is that what you mean or is there could
you see something specific
in my line that would say you're headed
for
68 sorry uh no it's not not specific but
what it's based on is machine learning
based on thousands of people's um code
of methylation on the genome
and comparing that to their health and
their date of death
oh [__] that's so interesting so if you
were to take my blood right now what
would you look for
exactly we would read the methylation
the camp these are chemicals hydrogen
and oxygen bound to the dna chemically
physically bound and those accumulate
as you get older in very predictable
ways in fact they're so predictable
that we can use the same clock to
measure the
dog's age and a human's age whoa all
based on methylation
right okay what causes methylation
well there are two classes of enzymes
the ones that add the methyl chemicals
and those that subtract it
okay how do i take a boatload of ones
that subtract it ah that's what we're
working on
now here's the key level two aging
reset which we can do by some of the
things that i'm doing in my life yeah
probably you are too
those aren't permanent changes you can't
just do that and expect
that take take one treatment and you go
on living for another 10 years
okay because level two isn't as
permanent it's somewhat permanent
than level one but level three is truly
permanent
it you could reset yourself ten years
and then go back and then wait another
ten years
and potentially reset the clock again if
you know how to do that
and we're just starting to figure out
how to do that there are
three main pathways that regulate aging
in animals and probably in ourselves
there are the sirtuins that i've talked
about a lot today
there's one called mtor which responds
to how much
amino acids or how many amino acids are
in your body
it will hunker down and protect the body
the fewer amino acids it has access to
okay okay then the third is called ampk
and this is the energy sensor when your
body has low levels of energy
it will allow the body to hunker down
and protect itself from diseases
but why ampk is worth mentioning is this
is one of the targets as we call it
of the drug metformin metformin will
activate this ampk pathway
and make the body think that it's hungry
when often it's not
and also keep your blood sugar levels
more steady why would i
uh hungry at a cellular level or i
actually experience hunger
at a cereal level okay but it also has
an interesting side effect is from for a
lot of people myself included
it's a bit harsh on the stomach so it
also reduces my appetite
but what's great about metformin is that
it's been in millions of people
for a few decades so we know the side
effects
they're relatively i'm sorry really fast
so metformin is creating at a cellular
level the sense that i'm hungry and
you're saying
that from a hormesis perspective of a
little bit of bad it's like stressing
the system
and that's why we think it works it is
it's exactly doing that
and so that it actually helps the body
respond in a way to boost the energy
supply
so one thing it does that's that's
undeniable is it boosts the level
the numbers of mitochondria it actually
creates additional mitochondria so your
cells are getting more efficient
or more able to generate energy right
over the long run
but in the short run what it does is it
actually poisons part of the
mitochondria
so it's it's a little bit of poison that
leads to benefits down the line
what part is poisoned uh it's called
complex one
so that there are protons that are
in one part of the area of the
mitochondria in a in a membrane region
and you the cell builds up protons it
becomes really acidic
in that region but they the cell wants
to release them
so what they do is they put little pores
in between the membranes
so they can leak from the high
concentrated zone to the low
concentration in the middle
and as they pass through that pore it
spins
the pore around and that's spinning
physical spinning of that protein
will generate chemical energy called atp
that's how atp is created and without
atp we're dead in about 10 seconds
the cells in our body also think that
they need to become more sensitive to
insulin
yeah which keeps our glucose and sugar
levels more steady
okay yeah that's key because that's what
helps the diet
type 2 diabetics recover and
you know prevents the disease from
getting worse yes the second is that
it's just been discovered
in humans that if you take metformin a
lot of it
and exercise it can blunt the effects of
exercise on building mitochondria
what we think is going on is that you
don't want to always have metformin in
your system or your body won't have a
chance to recover from that
slight poison
people should try various diets and see
what works for them and i think a lot of
people get stuck in this regimented
thing where
and it can backfire on them too they're
carnivore so then when berries come in
season when people might watch this
towards the end of summer
blueberries gonna be in full swing does
that mean you totally avoid blueberries
because there's
i believe i'm not one of these people
that think plants are bad i think
blueberries
the anthocyanins and the various and you
know antioxidants have a lot of benefit
to your microbiome into your body in
general but then when you start to
identify that you're a carnivore or a
keto or you're vegan
then you close yourself down a little
bit so i think in your case
you don't have any major health issues
that i'm aware of you know that you've
talked about
so i would just continue what you're
doing but maybe in the winter
probably the best time to go carnivore
i'm gonna say [__] you
and here's i don't have i have one
health issue and that is
i'm dying so the only real question i
care about
in every health theory episode i do is
how do i live forever
like if you're steering by how you feel
which is essentially what i do
i just don't know what its impact is on
longevity
um if a carnivore diet like if somebody
could tell me no no a thousand percent
if you do a carnivore diet you're gonna
live to 150. i'd be all over the
carnivore diet all day every day i
wouldn't even think about it i'd never
touch another [__] blueberry in my
life like
i would just eat it um but it's it's
that big [__] question mark about
longevity that winds me up
well let me pose this question to you
how could a diet be negatively affecting
your longevity if it makes you feel
better
that makes your sleep better if it
improves your heart rate variability if
it makes you stronger
if it makes you recover better how could
it slow down your longevity
i mean or affect longevity in a negative
way
i don't know maybe i'm not thinking
about this through properly but
it doesn't make sense to me this video
was brought to you by our very own
impact theory university for more
information be sure to check out the
description below
so if you look at this umbrella of
intermittent fasting within that are
different
protocols alternate day fasting the 5 2
16 8
where you're fasting like you fast for
24 basically yeah
20 hours a day within that is this
time-restricted feeding
bubble and they are having subjects eat
earlier in the day so they started
eating at 8 and cutting off at two
and that was it and what they showed is
there was a dramatic increase in
autophagy just by doing that
changes in hormones changes in glucose
insulin
but we always think well if a tophage is
good
more is better but if we think at
overweight people their fat
cells have higher levels of autophagy
occurring
it's a compensatory mechanism because if
you were to it sounds
weird but if you were to biopsy someone
who's morbidly obese
and you look at their fat tissue there's
a lot of necrosis
and like literally tissues are dying
there's a lot of immune cells
so if you didn't know anything about
autophagy and you looked at
adipocytes in obesity you would think
autophagy is bad because it's
upregulated
and so i just want people to understand
and certain cancers
utilize autophagy up regulation to avert
the immune system to help it
so it's interesting so it's not this
clear some
it's good or bad it's contextualized and
tissue specific
and sometimes more is not better so that
a lot of people are doing hey
i did a 24 hour fast let's just roll it
out to 96 hours 72 hours
what are your goals why are you doing
this sometimes more is not better
and when isn't it better because so
if i knew for instance that um
fasting 100 would keep you cancer-free
but you have to do
let's say a 14-day fast i would do it i
would do it every year
so when is
when is too much too much you know i
think
when is too much is when it affects your
sleep when it affects
your recovery your muscle performance
when you start seeing negative side
effects
when is it ideal when you feel good
you know i'm not sure what the ideal
situation is that really true
so when i think okay so now let's make
it real practical for me i'll just be
selfish for a minute so
uh i hate doing a five-day fast because
my productivity
falls through the [__] roof or floor
um
after 72 hours 72 hours is very doable i
can stay focused
i still have energy all that but the
last two days are
gnarly and i i start feeling sick and
and i'm just slowing down
and i don't have my energy and i find
myself zoning out
so if it isn't advantageous i want to
stop doing it
but i know that my motives aren't pure
so i'm gonna
need some compelling evidence here
here's my
thought is autophagy
you know is influenced by circadian
rhythms by epigenetics or whatever
just like exercise why not make it more
consistent
and shorter so every week do a 24-hour
fast does everyone need to do that no
but if you're looking for longevity like
you are
and then every quarter do a little bit
of the longer one like three days or two
days or whatever
right so there's a little bit more
consistency because if you
i did the math if you look at over the
course of a year you fast every monday
for 24 hours
if you don't do any other prolonged fast
besides that
you're fasting for 16 of the entire
calorie year
that gets you pretty close to that 20
calorie restriction that's well known
and it's a good
proxy for longevity enhancement at least
in animals and other humans
without having to really restrict
yourself anything else above that in my
eyes is just bonus so if you do a three
day fast or a four day fast
every six months that's just icing on
the cake and that can get you closer to
that 20
let's be clear nobody knows what the
perfect diet is even when it comes to
fasting it's all
largely based on rodent studies so what
i can tell you about the rodent studies
which i'm
very familiar with is that if you take a
rodent and reduce its calories by 25
for its whole life it will live longer
30 percent
but it'll be really miserable and
aggressive
and that's true for us as well i've
tried calorie restriction for about a
week and i gave up i was pretty angry
it's not just what you eat it's when you
eat that's important
and what's been found is that if as long
as you have that period of hunger
in a mouth so you can feed them every
other day then they can gorge themselves
as much as they want and they do they
eat about 90
of what a mouse having free access to
food would eat they have the same
longevity benefit
as a mouse that's always been hungry and
if that's true what that means is for us
is that we can enjoy life as long as we
have that period of hunger
once a day or maybe twice a week get the
body to
fear adversity and the future but not
enough to cause lasting damage
or the unspooling of the dna that'll
lead to disease and eventually death
so you you don't want to overdo it you
want to be a little bit puffed you want
to be a little bit hungry
but of course starvation malnutrition is
not going to make you live longer
so it's a fine line in what we've
learned from many animal studies and
increasing numbers of clinical trials in
humans
is that you want to pulse it let the
body recover not constant we used to
make animals go hungry all their lives
and it worked
but it actually works better if you let
them recover and i think that's that's
the secret
short-term discomfort of not eating for
five days
once twice four or five times a year
going through a cycle like that i think
that
the short-term inconvenience of that
is trivial compared to the potential
benefit of
a true fast you know water only fast for
some period of time and
i still don't know what that minimum is
i think it's probably a minimum of three
days or necessary
to start to get some of the real
benefits of autophagy
mitophagy and things like that but
what's the difference between autophagy
and my topic
um autophagy is the cell eating itself
and mitophagy specifically is the
recycling of the mitochondria
okay um
so i think when someone says and i have
many patients or friends or family
members who have said like
yeah that's just there's no way i'm ever
gonna i could never give up
food even transiently i think
that's that's an ace it comes from like
not not even being willing to give it a
shot
like what's the emotional
hang up because you were you used to be
literally the epitome of the robotic
eater
just insanely strict and you said about
three years ago
you were like nope not doing that
anymore and i think to quote you exactly
i no longer have the intestinal
fortitude
to eat like a robot so there was
something in you that it
no longer was worth it yeah that became
much harder than what i do today which
is
so so back then i wasn't doing any time
restricted feeding i wasn't doing any
fasting it was a pure form of dietary
restriction so my
my sort of mental model for nutrition is
everybody is starting out on one side
eating the standard american diet
abbreviated as sad which is an
appropriate abbreviation
and the thing i always tell patients on
day one is like look the good news is
you can't get any worse than this
the only thing if you're starting at the
sad the only thing you can do to make it
worse is eat more of this ad
right but it's like the standard
american diet
and i don't believe this was deliberate
right i don't think there's a conspiracy
theory here
but just through a lot of bad luck
uh has arrived at the absolute worst
combination of macronutrients you could
possibly imagine like
you couldn't come up with a way to
confuse someone's metabolism
than to combine fats and carbohydrates
in the
ratios that they are combined in most of
the
foods that we would eat by default if we
were left to our druthers
so from there i say look there's kind of
two introductory moves
which are not mutually exclusive but you
can pick one or the other the first is
time restricted feeding
where now you don't limit what you eat
you just limit when you eat it and then
the second is dietary restriction you
don't restrict when you eat you don't
restrict how much you eat
which you also don't restrict in time or
feeding but you restrict
certain elements of what you eat so for
those three
years that i was on a ketogenic diet
which is
i mean probably one of the most
demanding
subsets of dietary restriction um
you know i'd pulled that lever as hard
as it could be pulled then
you move into diets that sort of mimic
fasting
which is basically just another way of
saying hypocaloric diets for transient
uh periods of time and then ultimately
even beyond that is fasting just
you know water only also for limited
periods of time
nowhere in there do i include constant
caloric restriction
so you know reducing by 20 30 your
energy intake
indefinitely i i think the data are
pretty clear that that
is not a winning strategy there's
something about the cycling
into and out of catabolic versus
anabolic state
you're basically clearing house right
you're sort of getting the cells that
are themselves defective and hopefully
the ones with the most effective
mitochondria we'd love to target those
the most for
other reasons what you want to see is
the regrowth
you want to when you refeed you want to
see the selective repopulation of the
better cells
the most robust experiments done on this
in primates
did not really suggest that
as the diet got better the benefits of
caloric restriction got better in other
words
the worse the diet the better the
benefit of caloric restriction which
points us to this idea that
dietary restriction should still always
be some component
of a healthy nutrition strategy my
interests are not remotely commercial my
interest is in just knowing what to do
it's like i want this test to tell me
exactly what the right fasting protocol
needs to be
should i be fasting three days a month
seven days every three months
14 days once a year like i want to
know that and there's no amount of money
that would make it worth you know not
knowing the answer to that question
um wow that's a bold statement well
think about it i'm not
to suggest that like money doesn't
matter and money you can't do great
things with money like i want money just
as much as the next person
but never at the expense like i don't
want anything to get in the way of the
knowledge that can drive living longer
that to me is such a priority that i
would rather
be poor but know how to you know
live longer and have all the money in
the world and lose my health
with fasting have you had pushback from
people
that um they don't
think you should or they seem to have
almost a religious aversion to it
yeah there's still people that think
it's starving yourself
which very quickly starving is you have
no food and you can't eat food
fasting is you have food you choose not
to
eat for a period of time for a specific
purpose
two totally different things and so
when you explain it in that way you're
in total control
if at any point during a fast you need
to eat guess what
eat jason and i both say to do that in
our book
if you're fasting and you're not just
not feeling right
eat but we also explain
the the back end of it if you're just
kind of
okay i've got head hunger and i just
don't know if i can get through it
okay that's a different issue we'll help
you with that
you know do some salt and electrolytes
and different things kind of calm things
down
and usually people can get through it
and get to a one week fast
very easy now i find that a lot of
people don't really understand
what a fast is right walk people through
the difference between
intermittent fasting and then a full
extended fasting
here's the easiest way to intermittent
fast it's gonna make it so easy for
everybody watching right now
so you eat your last meal today at six
right six pm
wake up the next morning yeah i'm not
really hungry you just skip breakfast
and keep in mind that term breakfast
literally means break
the fast doesn't mean you have to eat at
eight o'clock in the morning
it just means you're breaking the fast
so why don't we push that break
fast to knew so if you do that you go
from six o'clock the night before
to noon the next day you just
intermittent fasted
for 18 hours and all you missed was one
meal are you really gonna miss that one
meal
most people not once your keto adapted
very
easily you will not you know a lot of us
have this ball and chain when it comes
to food right we're just
you know we eat at breakfast we eat
lunch and we work we take up so much of
our mental bandwidth it can be used for
productivity for relationships for
self-development but
when i do interviews when i interview
other people or when i'm being
interviewed
i like to do it in a fasted state now
i didn't start doing that it took me a
while to get to the point where my
ketone levels get to a
point where i'm not feeling hypoglycemic
and the symptoms of like low blood sugar
affect me
but i don't really worry about is
because once you're
fasted for me personally
i don't start to get negative symptoms
in terms of sleep issues and maybe
constipation or whatever until day three
so i'm cool going to 36 hours and not
knowing
am i going to have food or not so it's
just a way to clear the cobwebs
not have to worry about meal prep on
sunday but the reason why i do it
is i actually have a tumor biomarker
that's elevated called alpha fetal
protein
interesting that's why you started doing
it well that's why i'm
fasting pro more on a more prolonged
basis every two tell people why why do
you think that it
and then tell us the exact protocol yeah
um give people a little bit of the
background on the potential anti-cancer
properties
what you've read i'm super interested in
this so you can go as crazy as you want
well you know there's a lot of research
people talk about fasting first of all
lowering glucose and insulin
and so obviously there's many different
cancer subtypes and cancer cells
metastasize and they
they mutate and and so forth but a lot
of research shows that cancer cells can
utilize glucose and insulin to thrive so
getting rid of those growth insulin i've
not heard that so the cancer cell can
actually use insulin as
what a growth factor is a growth factor
to kind of pivot
their metabolism to a more glycolytic so
they're burning sugar
instead of fats and we'll get into
autophagy in a minute but insulin is
involved in kind of
amplifying mtor mechanistic target of
rapamycin i know you had peter atiya on
and he talked at length about this
but this is really the gas pedal for
cellular growth and so it's
and i like to just pause right here and
let people know it's it i describe mtor
like a light switch in your home right
it's not good or bad it's the context
that matters your light switch is great
when you want to find something in the
dark
but it can be bad if you're sleeping and
someone turns it on
so that's where you know every time we
eat even if it's a vegan meal or a
animal-based meal we're going to
stimulate mtor so just wanted to throw
that out there it's not good or bad it
just is
in its context but getting back to your
question about insulin
that could be the purported mechanism
through which insulin may affect cancer
growth is
uh through mtor activation which just
kind of fuels
pro-growth pathways yeah so so getting
back to it
glucose inhibition or lowering glucose
down
lowering insulin enhancing mitochondrial
function so a lot of people
i'm sure you've talked about this you
know if we envision our home being a
cell
our home has different appliances right
we have the refrigerator
the the stove top the furnace inside
each one of our cells we have different
appliances they're called
organelles so they're little cells
within cells really and our mitochondria
play a key role in helping us
burn fat for fuel helping us think
clearly helping us move our muscles
and it seems that mitochondrial
dysfunction
is you know an upstream event leading to
various diseases from mild cognitive
impairment to
blood sugar issues in low energy fatigue
things like that but certainly cancer as
well
so we got the mitochondrial function and
then for me enhancing autophagy
so as i said um i do lab work i've been
doing lab work like
you know comprehensive metabolic panels
twice a year and i started to have this
gi pain and i could not figure out
where it was coming from and it was just
like persistent so after three months
this was back in 2015.
i started to do some research on the
internet i'm like you know maybe i could
have cancer maybe i could have something
and i started to look and since it was
in this region i was looking for
gastrointestinal biomarkers so i
measured those
and there was this one test called alpha
fetal protein which is high
in people that have hepatitis or
hepatocellular carcinoma which is a
metastasis of the liver so i ran it
and the normal range is zero to eight
and mine was 80.
whoa so anytime you have a weird
biomarker just retest because it could
just be part of the lab
so i retested it and it was 79 and then
i was freaking out like
dude because i have a little girl at
home so i'm i was nervous right
you're nervous because that's indicative
of having this liver cancer
exactly okay so because i had this
biomarker
i started to kind of believe that i
might have cancer and then i started
like
on one hand it was great because i was
more present with my daughter
enjoying the moment putting down the
phone at night things like that but on
the other side i was like
i can't have this mindset that i have
something i
and this is common in western medicine
you have autoimmune disease you have
hashimoto's so people start saying
i have ms i have this and i i think we
need to realize that
certainly our body can have
perturbations but it doesn't mean you're
always going to
manifest symptoms of that if you you can
the body and the mind and the diet and
lifestyle are so powerful
so far my my exploration to this topic
has
has suggested a couple of things so one
is
we do tend to disproportionately load
joints over muscles
so in an ideal world you would want to
figure out a way to exercise where you
can maximally load the muscle while
minimally loading the
joint so there is a lot of joint failure
that becomes problematic i mean
and i'm separating the obvious which is
there's just too many people who aren't
exercising enough or correctly at all
and so they're just sort of withering
away but if you
come at this through the lens of okay
well what if we're dealing with a subset
of people who
are committed to figuring out how can
they exercise best
in many ways it's just a lack of
specificity right so
most people who exercise can't actually
tell you why they're doing what they're
doing
the 99.9 percent of us who don't get
paid to play a sport and who aren't even
really competing at a serious level
outside of professional ranks
i don't think we know what our sport is
and i think the sport
should be being the most kick-ass 100
year old that ever lived
so what would that look like like what
does it mean to be the most kick-ass 100
year old and i think you have to then
reverse
engineer all of the things one should be
able to do
so a kick-ass 100 year old should be
able to i don't know i'm making this up
because i haven't fully codified this
yet but they should certainly be able to
carry two
25-pound bags from a grocery store they
should be able to
lift a 30 or 40 pound bag over their
head to put it in
a you know compartment of an airport or
of an airplane they should be able to
have a you know 25 pound little terror
run at them you know by either great
grandchild or dip down into a squat and
grab them and pick them up they should
be able to jump down on the floor
and play with cars or dolls and stand up
without assistance
and if you start to map out the 25 or 35
things that becomes a new decathlon
so instead of saying the decathlon is
running this distance jumping this far
swimming this far it's like great those
are kind of arbitrary
now we're going to come up with like
real world things that you have to be
able to do when you're 100
if you want to live what i would
describe as potentially
a more fulfilling physical life to enjoy
the fruits of having not died by that
point in your life
the model i have in my mind is that of
sort of bruce lee bruce lee
sort of looked at each and every
discipline of martial arts including
boxing and wrestling and things like
that
and said let me extract from each of
these disciplines that which i believe
is useful
discard those that i think are useless
and create a perfect fighting form
that is truly geared towards
self-defense so it is not a sport there
is no tournament there is no rank there
is no belt there is no sensei
it is can you handle yourself in a life
or death situation
if i go to a yoga class or if i do a
pilates class
invariably there's something in there
that i think is really valuable
and truthfully there's a bunch of stuff
that i'm like i don't need this this is
just if i had infinite time this would
be fine to do but i don't have infinite
time
so now you apply a constraint to the
problem which is not only do you want to
be sort of the best
100 year old imaginable what if you're
only willing to spend 10 to 12 hours a
week preparing for that
and so you say okay well so there's a
new sport which we defined some of the
parameters of
that's your new olympics and that
olympics is 50 years from now
how will you train for it if you're only
willing to spend 10 to 12 hours a week
training for it
well my guess is you will take a lot of
things
from various disciplines discard a lot
of things and sort of have to build a
very bespoke
routine around it that will involve the
maintenance of muscle mass joint
integrity
flexibility functional movement balance
things that we don't even really think
about anymore how many times does
someone who's 90
fall because they've lost their balance
and it's that fall that ultimately leads
to their demise
i basically haven't had more than 155
pounds on my back
in six weeks and but by changing the
form of what i'm doing and
making everything a single leg movement
so a lot of curtsy squats
lateral lunges incredibly strict lunges
where you are
so specifically loading the front leg
glute
i got to tell you like i'm not and then
doing a lot of single leg body weight
squats
but with meticulous form so that i'm
fully loading the glute not overloading
the quad which is my absolute common
mistake
by doing these things i don't feel like
i've lost a step
but i absolutely know i'm loading myself
less
now the question is does that matter and
i don't think i know the answer yet
so unfortunately i feel like i'm still
too early in this process to know
what the finish line looks like and
there's other problems that we haven't
even touched on right like what
vo2 max and what aerobic base are
necessary as a minimum threshold
yeah talk to me about that because i
hate cardio but it's one of those if i
have to
to have the kind of longevity then so be
it and and the term cardio is itself so
confusing right because
even if you think of what is vo2 max i
mean most people think well that's
really
a heart lung issue it's actually not
it's more of a muscle issue interesting
because
that's where the bottleneck is not in
how much oxygen can you get in your
lungs
the bottleneck is how much can your
muscles utilize
so when you look at you know the winner
of the tour de france
or you know the gold medalist in you
know cross-country skiing or the person
who wins the boston marathon like when
you
when you look at the most extreme
endurance athletes who have these very
high vo2 maxes
what's unique about these people is
their muscles
which is counterintuitive because
they're usually very slender individuals
but their muscles are so efficient
at aerobic metabolism that they are able
to
extract so much oxygen out of blood when
you and i
you know are at our maximum capacity
we're still breathing out you know
80 percent of the oxygen we breathed in
so it's really
not a gas exchange problem it's a muscle
problem that said vo2 max is a very
specific energy system that probably
gets a little more credit than it
deserves
that's really only training one energy
system and i think
you if you ignore these other energy
systems you're
you're sort of not fully optimizing
around your performance
translating that to this new sport this
100 year old kick-ass sport
i think it's just going to require a
little more thought i'm talking to
orthopedic surgeons and saying okay
talk to me about the injuries that are
killing people
because there's two types of orthopedic
injuries that kill people there's fast
death and slow death
so fast death is patient falls and you
know
within a day or so is dead from whatever
the injury was so they you know break
their femur they have a fat embolism
they're dead or they fall and they hit
their head and they
you know have a cerebral vascular
accident they're dead
um but then there's also the slow deaths
right and these ones are to me
[Music]
far less talked about but in many ways
more tragic so so one of my closest
friends his father died recently
89 years old complications of
alzheimer's disease
he'd been diagnosed eight months before
he died so in
some senses you could say well the good
news is he was spared he and his family
were spared a lot of suffering because
you know he was diagnosed in january he
died in august
but when i went home for the funeral i
was sort of
struck by how difficult it had been for
him since he was 81.
the two things he loved most in life
which were golf and tending to his yard
he couldn't do because of more chronic
orthopedic injuries
so he spent the last decade of his life
kind of watching tv
and to me that's the thing we have to be
able to avoid
and you know for me i don't know what
it's going to be when i'm 100 but i know
that
today if i had to start saying if
someone said well
you can't drive a race car and you can't
shoot a bow and arrow and you can't lift
weights
it doesn't doesn't matter how heavy it
is right but you can't do these
movements
or you can't lay on the floor to play
if i start if i had to give those things
up i'm not sure how much i'd want to
kick around
and so talking to these orthopedic
surgeons is giving me a real insight
into where those failures are coming
from
and the single most important insight
i've gained from them is something you
alluded to at the outset which is just
joint overload
you know so much of what we do is even
while trying to be good
meaning trying to exercise know these
things is just disproportionately taking
on rest so
i'll give you one silly example right a
military press is there a time and a
place for military press absolutely
does it have any role in my life
absolutely not right why not
first of all i don't need to load my
spine in that way and
if i could get 80 of the benefit that i
get out of a military press by doing
loaded activities below my shoulder line
below my neck
and using more static loaded movements
above
and that gives me 80 percent of the
benefit at 20 of the risk
that's exactly the kind of compromise
i'm willing to make um i actually spent
a lot of my 30s and 40s not exercising
at all
it's crazy right someone like me but
i've become better at it now that i'm
you know i was approaching 50 now i'm
50. uh
so i spend uh about four hours in the
gym on the weekend
with my son benjamin do like two hours a
day no four hours straight
but it's not all exercise okay so it's
an hour with my trainer sean
who does mostly a combination of weights
and stretching
then it's another hour on my own with my
son we do some
treadmill some more stretching and
essentially just muck around
doing stuff that's fun for him and then
we also then we do
some some yoga downstairs in the gym a
little bit of relaxation
but the best fun part that i really love
is at the end
we do a sauna hot tub cold bath
sauna hot tub cold bath for about an
hour and i feel fantastic after talk to
me about that so in your book you go
into cold exposure you said you moved to
boston it sucked coming from australia
and you bundled up and now you wish you
hadn't
um why cold exposure is cold
and hot both necessary what's the
difference well there are a few reasons
one is the high level view
is that anything that stresses your body
puts it into a state of shock is good
in the long run but a little bit of
perceived adversity being
a little bit too hot a little bit too
cold and especially the gradient between
those two which is why we
jump from one to the other the next
point is that i've looked at the
literature
and at first when uh i was prompted by
my publisher to look into this
scientifically they said you know what
about this cryotherapy what do you think
and a couple of years ago i had no idea
that this was real it sounded like
[__] to me
but i looked into it and there were
there are two important things one is
cryotherapy or cold
exposure we'll build up what's called
brown fat
we didn't know brown fat existed in
humans until about five years ago
typically it's across your back and in
other reasons you can see with a pet
scan but
otherwise it's pretty invisible just
looks like fat but brown fat is
particularly healthy because it
it has a lot of mitochondria and we
think it also secretes little proteins
that
tell the rest of the body to be healthy
in what way to be healthy
uh we're not sure yet we're not sure
interesting oh man i want the answer to
that question
but it certainly revs up your metabolism
and will burn energy if you're looking
to stay lean
having a bit of brown fat is is all good
so my my friend ray cronus and i have
written on this
and andrew bremer and at the nih we call
it the metabolic winter hypothesis and
essentially it's saying that in our
lifestyles these days we're always warm
i'm wearing this jacket we sleep with
the covers on we turn up the heat
we never get exposed to cold unless we
we force ourselves to
and we think that that's possibly
largely responsible if not
you know maybe partly perhaps largely
responsible for
the diabetic problem we have
what okay so if if you're cold at night
you're going to burn a lot more energy
staying warm
yes turn on your brown fat now that's
going to keep people lean
if we bundle up and and we eat the kind
of diets that that
we see in the supermarket that's going
to be doubly bad for our bodies yeah
we're warm
we're not losing energy and we're eating
a lot more
i'm going to put you to the test for a
second so hiding behind
the screen door number one is somebody
i'm not going to tell you
anything about them i'm not going to
tell you if they're a man or woman
overweight ripped whatever
but you have to tell them how to eat for
longevity and feeling good
how should they eat i would say
sally or joe look i don't know what your
health issues are
i don't know what you're experiencing
but we're going to get you off
anything that comes in a box bag or a
can so no processed food no processed
food
i want you to go to a farmer that's
within a 50 mile radius of you
ask them what you can buy that's in
season
and and buy the animal products that you
feel comfortable consuming
i don't really care so much as what you
eat and how much i want you eating
at the same time every day whatever that
is so influencing the circadian rhythm
so there's a lot of new research studies
where they're controlling how many
calories people are eating the same
amount of calories but
if they force it into a confined window
it changes this mtor expression and not
just
a defined window but the same defined
window every day
you hit on the head exactly so if you're
if you're going to intermittent fast
great then eat from say you know noon to
six
or two to eight it doesn't matter but
just try to be consistent
just like we should try to go to bed at
the same time and wake up at the same
time
you know we hear a lot about toxic blue
light
well when we eat and food in general
affects our circadian biology
we have molecular clocks in our gut and
our muscle and our brain and our
pancreas
everywhere food entrains that clock too
what blood markers are you watching
um sleep sleep scores heart rate
variability
body temperature blood glucose and
ketones
my hemoglobin a1c increased by five
tenths of a point so it went from freeze
which is surprising to me yeah 4.8 to
5.3
but everything else i mean iron ferritin
increased which i was probably expecting
eating more red meat
things like that are you worried at all
about cholesterol
no because my triglycerides are
historically low um
that's the only one you worry about well
i worry about cholesterol
when triglycerides and glucose and
liver enzymes are out of whack so your
liver tends to take the brunt of
metabolic
burden first it's a key metabolic
signaling hub
and so if your liver enzymes start to
rise your glucose is rising or
hemoglobin a1c is rising
then in your triglycerides increase then
i'm i'm more concerned about
what's going on with your ldl
cholesterol
you know and your low hgl but without
that context i'm not totally worried
about it and
the thing that people don't really
realize is like your body can convert
protein
via gluconeogenesis to glucose
there's certain cells and tissues red
blood cells the neuron various
central nervous system cells within our
brain that need absolutely need glucose
they can't use fats or ketones
protein can be back converted as can
liberating stored body fat the
body fat is you know you have your
triglycerides and on you know your
triglyceride on top of that is glycerol
and when you liberate that for free
fatty acids to make ketones that
glycerol gets converted to make glucose
so a lot of people think you need to
have carbs to raise glucose for obligate
glucose utilizing cells but that
glycerol backbone gets shunted right
into that cycle so yeah it's interesting
tom i don't know what the solution is
for people should they go carnivores
should they not i think if you have
digestive issues it's worth a shot and
it sounds
so polarizing controversial but you know
in functional medicine we've been
talking about this for a while
we you know people like jeff bland and
sid baker mark hyman
an elimination diet which was
essentially just basically plain old
white rice and lamb
that was it like that's almost carnivore
in the sense obviously
if you overdo the white rice you're
going to negate some of that but it was
really eliminating all the variables
that could affect the immune system
you've talked really eloquently about
that you can't
just look at whether somebody is skinny
or not you've really got to look at
biomarkers
so what are biomarkers that you really
pay attention to that you think all of
us should pay attention to in terms of
actually determining our health yeah and
thank you for that question because i do
get criticized online because i still
have weight on the body
but at the end of the day you're right
health markers are
what matters and for me i want to see
very specific things so inflammation
because without inflammation in the body
there is no chronic disease
fasting insulin is another one that is a
key and so
insulin is uh the kind of master hormone
in the body and so if you control
insulin levels and don't allow it to go
out of whack
then again your body is in a pretty good
state of health and then
triglyceride the hdl ratio everybody's
like oh
my total cholesterol is out of whack and
my doctor wants to put me on a statin
medication and ldl and blah blah blah
and i'm like okay that was the science
50 years ago
would you like to know what it is in
2018 so in 2018
it's triglyceride-based scale ratio
triglycerides
are that really true bad fat in the
blood
and so people are like oh okay well
triglycerides are fat
in the blood it must come from the fat
in the diet no no
it comes from the carbs and so
the more carbs you eat the higher the
triglycerides go my wife christine she
had a
300 triglycerides normal with
conventional medicine is under 150
you'll find out here in a minute that's
high but 300 is what she had
all we did was cut out her skittles m
m's and dr pepper this was many years
ago
just those three things all sugary
things and she dropped in six weeks
from 300 to 130. and what i do is i
spend about 15 minutes
at 150 degrees fahrenheit well that's
reasonably intense but you get used to
it then we go into the steam room
um you know we're sitting there chatting
it's great
uh temperatures lower in the steam room
because the humidity is
saturated the roof's dripping on you hot
water
uh but that that i i don't know if the
steam helps but i
certainly love the feeling of being in
there and my skin
starts to be healthier because of course
it's cleaning itself out
and then the final thing i do is hot tub
pretty hot
hot water and then and then i go and
dunk
below the water a couple of times in
water that's
less than four degrees celsius i take a
blood test from a company called inside
tracker which in full disclosure i
invested in years ago
and they look at about 30 parameters in
your blood and give you feedback
it's doctor supervised so it's it's
legit and it's based on
a lot of science and that at least gives
you some feedback
about your body about what's actually
happening if you change your lifestyle
or you take a supplement
or even a new drug for that matter so
you've got to have you've got to be
monitoring because you don't you don't
want to fly blind you don't know if for
you you're doing
harm or doing good um so do do a blood
test at least go to your doctor and have
a blood test for for a good
goodness sake you could have your genome
sequenced
or do something that looks at the the
variance in your genome
for relatively little cost i think it's
99 now the ability to manipulate
mtor has been very excited so we kind of
talked about mtors kind of the gas pedal
on our cells to grow
and you know one of the reasons that you
fast one of the main benefits of fasting
prolongedly
is affecting glucose insulin
mitochondria function that we introduced
the show on but it
it drops empty towards to the floor and
we know that chronic
mtor overexpression is linked with
premature aging diseases
so i think the ability through drugs
through exercise and through fasting
protocols to manipulate this
critical energy sensor called mtor is
super fascinating so i think you know
right now in 2019 a lot of people are
microdosing psilocybin and lsd
i personally experiment with that fairly
often i think in two years people are
going to be microdosing rapamycin people
are going to be
microdosing various mtor inhibitors to
to like they're like called calorie
restriction memetics so we're kind of
manipulating
the physiological effects people are
already [__] with rapamycin it's a
very few you mentioned the other one i'm
blanking on it right now like metformin
does it take metformin i don't i take
berberine interesting so
the one thing like when the camera stop
rolling
yeah the one thing a lot of people are
like
yeah i [__] with it is is that 1000 i'm
talking about doctors yeah
where i'm like all right then like it's
one of those it is
only my fear of the unknown where it's
like if something seems too good to be
true it probably is and i don't know
what kind because they've been giving it
to
diabetics and cancer patients for a long
time a long time so
i don't know what kind of studies have
come out based on that but
metformin is probably one of the safest
drugs you could take um
it it's actually very poorly absorbed
here's what's really good so i'm you
know studied the microbiome forever i'm
very curious about how these drugs work
like it's only 33 or something like that
is absorbed
how is it working it's affecting your
microbiome it's affecting the gut
hormones and your bugs
so very safe the only thing you might
need to add more of would be b12 and
folate because it
purportedly does affect methylation and
or absorption
but that's a very safe drug i i i'm not
i wouldn't be ashamed to take
say that i take it i don't i take
berberine so i do that 500 milligrams of
berberine hydrochloride
three same thing meant to slow mtor yeah
well
it affects am i i don't wanna get
complex into the biochemistry but
you have kind of a yin yang you have
mtors growth
ampk is breakdown okay you know
one's either good nor bad they just are
uh berberine and metformin
increase ampk ampk is a switch just like
em towards a switch they're different
knobs
so it's breaking down what
crap inside ourselves okay so this is a
little bit like autophagy
ampk and mtor are the key cellular
switches that ultimately guide autophagy
and govern whether or not we're going to
tear down
break down you know advert proteins
dysfunctional proteins aggregated
proteins
dysfunctional organelles we kind of
talked about how our cells are like
little homes inside our appliances
those appliances become dysfunctional
and that's where autophagy
self-digest comes in and so you have a
bad
furnace autophagy and will help to clear
that
a bad furnace in your cell would be a
mitochondria golgi apparate
endoplasmic reticulum there's all these
different compartments
it's even speculated that the ability to
break down fat
and glycogen store glucose is autophagy
mediated
even recovering from exercise this is
what's so cool so when we feel sore
after workout
how do you think our body recovers from
that it's via autophagy
and breaking down those damaged proteins
so that we can rebuild them so that
they're stronger for our next workout
so i like to throw that in there because
when people hear autophagy they think
fasting
but that's just one knob on the
cytophagy wheel
exercise there's a ton of data showing
that exercise enhances autophagy
because you're causing your body to dig
deep and break down glycogen for that
workout
we've been working for 10 years as i
said accelerating the clock
we can drive that hand of the clock
forwards now we
we cut the dna of the animal let it heal
and in doing so we distract those
proteins from where they come from so
we're
disturbing this survival circuit so much
that we
disrupt the spooling of the dna and what
we got was an old mouse
by every account based on histology
which is looking at the tissues
based on their physiology they got gray
they got arthritis they got
heart disease even and when we look at
the molecular clock
that methylation clock they were 50
percent older
communications they had more like clumps
everywhere
uh those methyl groups were added to the
dna
right right okay so we had given them
heart disease and
alzheimer's or dementia we'd given them
all these diseases
but by measuring the clock what we had
actually done is give them aging
but that that was the first step that
took 10 years the last year we've been
asking
how do you get the hands to go backwards
that's a lot harder but we were
fortunate that
the 2012 nobel prize was one for the
ability to reverse that clock
in cells it's called was the prize
awarded to shinya yamanaka a japanese
fellow
very smart guy and he found at least
four genes that when you put into
say skin cells of an adult if you gave
me your skin cells i could go back to
laven
basically clone you i could take your
cells make a stem cell pool
and i could grow you into a new little
liver or a new little kidney
that's all easy not easy but it's doable
it's doable
um what that tells us is that those four
yamanaka genes can reset age
if i can take someone who's in like you
who's in their early 40s and make a new
you
as we've done now for many species dogs
cats sheep
monkeys those animals we can reset the
clock hundred percent
and those animals actually live a normal
lifespan that tells us that the
instructions to be young
are still in the cell somewhere as
though there's a backup hard drive
that tells the epigenome those spools
how to go back to be young again
and get those methyl groups back to
being young again not up here but back
there
for example we are treating aging of the
eye
in mice so we can take an old mouse we
deliver a virus the av
into the eye tiny little prick
it's the same virus that that's used to
correct genetic deficiencies in the eye
right now
fda approved drugs so this isn't science
fiction this is out there in in the
world right now
we give it give it to the old mice we
give them an answer about it antibiotic
called
doxycycline okay same thing you might
take if you got lyme disease
and that turns on these reprogramming
factors measure what happens to the eye
and those mice can see again like they
were young
imagine one day you could have every
cell in your body able to be rejuvenated
like that you cut yourself you break a
bone
you lose your your mind you have a
dementia you take a course of
doxycycline for a few weeks
and then stop switch it off again and
you you heal
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already
be sure to subscribe you're going to get
weekly videos on building a growth
mindset cultivating grit
and unlocking your full potential
you